Let's summarize some of the big ideas from
this lecture. The first thing that I want
to say, and I can't say this strongly enough,
is that coordinate frames are your friend.
They make it very easy to decompose and understand
complex problems. So we assign coordinate
frames to everything in the robot's environment
and write down the relationships between the
coordinate frames. It’s a very rigorous
approach and will ultimately save you a lot
of time. Don't be afraid to use lots of coordinate
frames.
Coordinate frames follow the right-handed
convention, the X axis and the Y axis are
related like this. If we have 2 coordinate
frames the relative rotation between them
is defined like this, angle increases positively
in the anti-clockwise direction. Points can
be represented as vectors with respect to
particular coordinate frames and in our notation
we denote a vector by lower case p, and the
preceding label indicates the frame that the
vector is with respect to, and the trailing
label indicates the destination of that vector.
So in this case the A denotes the fact that
the vector starts at the origin of frame A
and it goes to the point B.
We can describe the relationship between two
coordinate frames in terms of pose. And pose
is something that has got three parameters:
it's got a translation, the X and Y component
and the rotation which is the theta component.
We can consider it as a simple motion, a translation
and a rotation. Graphically we denote pose
by a thick vector with a triangular head.
Symbolically we represent it by the Greek
letter ksi. The left-hand label indicates
the frame of reference and the right-hand
label indicates the destination pose. So in
this case this is saying this is the relative
pose from coordinate frame A to coordinate frame B.
We can describe a point in terms of vectors
with respect to different coordinate frames.
In this case the point D, we can describe
with a vector in coordinate frame C attached
to the car or coordinate frame W which is
fixed within the world. We can transform a
vector from one coordinate frame to another
by applying the dot operator and the pose,
which describes the relationship between the
two coordinate frames. We can't simply add
vectors and poses because they are different
mathematical objects.
We can combine poses. So if we know the pose
from frame A to frame B and the pose from
frame B to frame C then we use the O+ operator
to compose them into the relative pose from
frame A to frame C, and we can extend this
approach indefinitely. This process is sometimes
called compounding or composition.
We can rewrite a complex set of spatial relationships
defined in terms of coordinate frames, in
terms of a bit tidier, a pose graph. And
we can use the pose graph to write spatial
relationships that describe relative poses
in terms of other relative poses.
We introduced a spatial algebra. The important
things to note are that we can compose or
compound two relative poses using the O+ operator.
The O+ operator is not commutative so ksi
1 O+ ksi 2 is not equal to ksi 2 O+ ksi 1.
We have a concept of a null pose that's a
zero relative motion. If we add it or we subtract
it from a pose it makes no difference, the
original pose is unchanged. And we introduced
a negation operator, the O- symbol, and that
is equivalent to the inverse motion of X ksi
Y, the motion from frame X to frame Y, the
negation of that is motion from frame Y to frame X.
And we also introduced the dot operator which
transforms a vector from one coordinate frame to another.
These are all very abstract concepts. We've
introduced a lot of symbols, we've introduced
ksi to represent a pose, O+, O- and the dot.
The next step is to turn this into real mathematical
objects and we can describe rotation in terms
of a 2 x 2 matrix that transforms a vector
from one coordinate frame to another coordinate
frame if the origins of those two frames are
identical. The 2 x 2 rotation matrix is an
orthogonal or orthonormal matrix, its inverse
is the same as its transpose and its determinant
is always +1. We say that such matrices belong
to the special orthogonal group of dimension
2. The matrix transforms a vector from coordinate
frame B to coordinate frame A, but it is defined
in terms of the angle from coordinate frame
A to coordinate frame B.
Finally we can describe pose in terms of a
concrete mathematical object and that is a
3 x 3 homogeneous transformation matrix which
belongs to the special Euclidean group of
dimension 2. The homogeneous transformation
matrix contains the rotation matrix and it
also contains the translation - that's the
vector from the origin frame A to the origin
of frame B. So this homogeneous transformation
matrix is equivalent to the abstract symbol
ksi that we've used earlier. Points are described
in terms of vectors, but when we use the homogeneous
transformation, we describe points in terms
of homogeneous vectors. We take the original
vector with two elements and we append a one
element to that.
Composition of poses for which we introduce
the abstract O+ operator is performed by matrix
multiplication. We multiply the two 3 x 3
matrices together to yield a new 3 x 3 matrix.
Negation which we described previously by
the abstract by the O- operator is the inverse
of the homogeneous transformation matrix,
and remember that the inverse for a homogeneous
matrix is not equal to its transpose. That
property only belongs to a rotation matrix
which is just a little part of the homogeneous
transform matrix.
The abstract operator dot which we used to
transform a vector from one coordinate frame
to another is implemented by multiplying the
homogeneous transformation matrix by the homogeneous
representation of that vector.